(informative)
Test method for determination of chlorine content
A.1
Test method for determination of total chloride
A.1.1
Reagents
–
standard solution of nitric acid (HNO3), analytical grade. Dilute 190 g of concentrated nitric
acid to 1 dm3 with distilled water;
–
isopropyl alcohol, analytical grade;
silver nitrate (AgNO3), analytical grade. Standard solution (0,025 mol/dm3);
–
0,4247 g of silver nitrate weighed accurately. Transfer it to a 1 l volumetric flask and add
distilled water to dissolve. Add 3 cm3 of concentrated nitric acid (density 1,42 kg/dm3) and
then add distilled water to the 1 dm3 mark of the volumetric flask. Standardize this solution
against a pure chloride standard. Check the solution at least monthly to ensure a constant
reagent. Dry the silver nitrate overnight in a desiccator before making up the solution. Both
the solid material and the solution shall be protected from light by storage in brown
glassware in the dark.
sodium diphenyl solution (C6H5C6H4Na). Organic halogen reagent: 30 cm3 of this reagent
–
are normally needed to give excess reagent. The preparation of sodium diphenyl solution is
described in 'McCoy – The Inorganic Analysis of Petroleum, Chemical Publishing Co. Inc.,
212 Fifth Avenue, New York'.
NOTE A sodium chloride crystal as used in infrared spectrometer cells is a suitable chloride standard.
A.1.2
Apparatus
separatory funnel, 250 cm3;
–
–
potentiometric titration apparatus;
–
electrodes: silver and glass electrode combination is preferred. A silver electrode with a
mercurous sulphate reference electrode is an acceptable alternative;
micro-burette, 5 cm3 with 0,01 cm3 divisions.
–
A.1.3
Procedure
Dissolve 35,5 g ± 0,1 g of the liquid under test in 25 cm3 toluene in a 150 cm3 beaker by stirring
with a small glass rod. Transfer the solution to a separatory funnel. Rinse the beaker several
times with a total of 25 cm3 toluene and add the rinses to the funnel.
Add an excess (approximately 30 cm3 is usually sufficient) of sodium diphenyl solution to the
contents of the separatory funnel. The excess is indicated by a colour change of blue or green.
Stopper the vessel and gently shake to thoroughly mix the solution, venting occasionally to
release the excess pressure build-up.
Allow the blue-green mixture to stand 5 min to ensure complete reaction. Remove stopper, add
2 cm3 of isopropyl alcohol, and swirl with stopper removed until excess reagent is destroyed.
Add slowly 50 cm3 of the nitric acid solution. Ensure that the organic and aqueous phases are
in intimate and uniform contact by gentle swirling and rocking for 5 min. Loosen the stopper
occasionally to release slight pressure. Drain the aqueous phase into a beaker. Extract the
organic phase twice more with 50 cm3 portions of nitric acid solution. Drain the aqueous phases
into the beaker containing the first extract.
9
IS/IEC 60867 : 2022
Place the beaker containing the aqueous phase on the titration stand and insert the electrode
system. Start the stirrer and record the initial value of potential or pH. Titrate slowly with AgNO3
solution (0,025 mol/dm3), recording readings after the addition of each drop of AgNO3 solution.
Continue titrating until the point of maximum change in potential or pH scale reading is reached.
Plot the volume of silver nitrate as abscissa and voltage or pH reading as ordinates. The end-
point is selected at the point of inflection of the curve.
Titrate the same volume of solvent without the sample, as a blank.
A.1.4
Calculation
Calculate the amount of total chlorine as follows:
Total chlorine (mg/kg) = [(A − B) N/m] 35,5 × 103
where
is the number of cubic centimetres of AgNO3 solution required for titration of the
A
sample;
is the number of cubic centimetres of AgNO3 solution required for titration of the blank;
B
is the molarity of the AgNO3 solution;
N
is the mass in grams of sample used;
m
35,5
is the atomic mass of chlorine.
A.2
Test method for determination of organic chloride
This test method is based on UOP 779/08.
10
IS/IEC 60867 : 2022
